Firewall: add <ethernet-type> matcher for documentation ; add config blueprint (#1549)
vyos/vyos-documentation: docs/configexamples/fwall-and-bridge.rst

:lastproofread: 2024-09-11

Bridge and firewall example
---------------------------

Scenario and requirements
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> This example shows how to configure a VyOS router with bridge and firewall

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example shows how to configure a VyOS router with bridge interfaces and firewall
```

rules.

> Three non vlan-aware bridges are going to be configured, and each one has its

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Three non VLAN-aware bridges are going to be configured, and each one has its
```

  set interfaces bridge br0 member interface eth1
  set interfaces bridge br0 member interface eth2
  set interfaces ethernet eth1 description 'br0'
  set interfaces ethernet eth2 description 'br0'

  # Bridge br1:
  set interfaces bridge br1 address '10.1.1.1/24'
  set interfaces bridge br1 description 'L3 bridge br1'
  set interfaces bridge br1 member interface eth3
  set interfaces bridge br1 member interface eth4
  set interfaces ethernet eth3 description 'br1'
  set interfaces ethernet eth4 description 'br1'

  # Bridge br2:
  set interfaces bridge br2 address '10.2.2.1/24'
  set interfaces bridge br2 description 'L3 bridge br2'
  set interfaces bridge br2 member interface eth5
  set interfaces bridge br2 member interface eth6
  set interfaces bridge br2 member interface eth7
  set interfaces ethernet eth5 description 'br2 - Host'
  set interfaces ethernet eth6 description 'br2 - Trusted DHCP Server'
  set interfaces ethernet eth7 description 'br2'

Bridge firewall configuration
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

In this section, we are going to configure the firewall rules that will be used
in bridge firewall, and will control the traffic within each bridge.

> We are going to use custom firewall rule-sets, one for each bridge that will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are going to use custom firewall rulesets, one for each bridge that will
```

If it's spelled without a hyphen elsewhere, we need to be consistent here as well.

> be used in ``prerouting``, and one for each bridge that will be used in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be used in ``prerouting``, and one for each bridge that will be used in the
```

``forward`` chain.

> Also, we are going to use firewall interface-group in oder to simplify the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, we are going to use firewall interface groups in order to simplify the
```

firewall configuration.

> So first, let's create the appropriate firewall interface-groups:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So first, let's create the required firewall interface groups:
```

.. code-block:: none

  # Bridge br0 interface-group:
  set firewall group interface-group br0-ifaces interface 'br0'
  set firewall group interface-group br0-ifaces interface 'eth1'
  set firewall group interface-group br0-ifaces interface 'eth2'
  
  # Bridge br1 interface-group:
  set firewall group interface-group br1-ifaces interface 'br1'
  set firewall group interface-group br1-ifaces interface 'eth3'
  set firewall group interface-group br1-ifaces interface 'eth4'
  
  # Bridge br2 interface-group:
  set firewall group interface-group br2-ifaces interface 'br2'
  set firewall group interface-group br2-ifaces interface 'eth5'
  set firewall group interface-group br2-ifaces interface 'eth6'
  set firewall group interface-group br2-ifaces interface 'eth7'

As said before, we are going to create custom firewall rulesets for each

> bridge, that will be used in ``prerouting`` chain, in order to drop as much as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
bridge, that will be used in the ``prerouting`` chain, in order to drop as much as
```

> bridge, that will be used in ``prerouting`` chain, in order to drop as much as

Reviewer: To drop as much unwanted traffic as early as possible?

> possible at this stage. So, custom rulests used in ``prerouting`` chain are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
possible at this stage. So, custom rulesets used in ``prerouting`` chain are
```

going to be ``br0-pre``, ``br1-pre``, and ``br2-pre``:

.. code-block:: none

  # Prerouting - Catch all traffic for br0
  set firewall bridge prerouting filter rule 10 action 'jump'
  set firewall bridge prerouting filter rule 10 description 'br0 traffic'
  set firewall bridge prerouting filter rule 10 inbound-interface group 'br0-ifaces'
  set firewall bridge prerouting filter rule 10 jump-target 'br0-pre'

  # Prerouting - Catch all traffic for br1
  set firewall bridge prerouting filter rule 20 action 'jump'
  set firewall bridge prerouting filter rule 20 description 'br1 traffic'
  set firewall bridge prerouting filter rule 20 inbound-interface group 'br1-ifaces'
  set firewall bridge prerouting filter rule 20 jump-target 'br1-pre'

  # Prerouting - Catch all traffic for br2
  set firewall bridge prerouting filter rule 30 action 'jump'
  set firewall bridge prerouting filter rule 30 description 'br2 traffic'
  set firewall bridge prerouting filter rule 30 inbound-interface group 'br2-ifaces'
  set firewall bridge prerouting filter rule 30 jump-target 'br2-pre'

> And content of the custom rule-sets:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And then create the custom rulesets:
```

  set firewall bridge name br1-pre rule 10 description 'Drop DHCP discover'
  set firewall bridge name br1-pre rule 10 action 'drop'
  set firewall bridge name br1-pre rule 10 protocol 'udp'
  set firewall bridge name br1-pre rule 10 source port '68'
  set firewall bridge name br1-pre rule 10 destination port '67'
  set firewall bridge name br1-pre rule 10 destination mac-address 'ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff'
  set firewall bridge name br1-pre rule 10 log
    # Requirement: drop all IPv6 connections
  set firewall bridge name br1-pre rule 20 description 'Drop IPv6 traffic'
  set firewall bridge name br1-pre rule 20 action 'drop'
  set firewall bridge name br1-pre rule 20 ethernet-type 'ipv6'
    # Accept everything else so it can be parsed later
  set firewall bridge name br1-pre default-action 'accept'

  ### br2 - br2-pre
    # Requirements: drop all IPv6 connections
  set firewall bridge name br2-pre rule 10 description 'Drop IPv6 traffic'
  set firewall bridge name br2-pre rule 10 action 'drop'
  set firewall bridge name br2-pre rule 10 ethernet-type 'ipv6'
    # Accept everything else so it can be parsed later
  set firewall bridge name br2-pre default-action 'accept'

> Now, on base chain ``forward``, we are going to define state policies, and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, in the ``forward`` chain, we are going to define state policies, and
```

> custom rule-sets for each bridge that would be used in ``forward`` chain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
custom rulesets for each bridge that would be used in the ``forward`` chain.
```

> These rule-sets are ``br0-fwd``, ``br1-fwd``, and ``br2-fwd``:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These rulesets are ``br0-fwd``, ``br1-fwd``, and ``br2-fwd``:
```

  set firewall bridge forward filter rule 10 action 'drop'
  set firewall bridge forward filter rule 10 state 'invalid'

  # Forward - Catch all traffic for br0
  set firewall bridge forward filter rule 110 description 'br0 traffic'
  set firewall bridge forward filter rule 110 action 'jump'
  set firewall bridge forward filter rule 110 inbound-interface group 'br0-ifaces'
  set firewall bridge forward filter rule 110 jump-target 'br0-fwd'

  # Forward - Catch all traffic for br1
  set firewall bridge forward filter rule 120 description 'br1 traffic'
  set firewall bridge forward filter rule 120 action 'jump'
  set firewall bridge forward filter rule 120 inbound-interface group 'br1-ifaces'
  set firewall bridge forward filter rule 120 jump-target 'br1-fwd'

  # Forward - Catch all traffic for br2
  set firewall bridge forward filter rule 130 description 'br2 traffic'
  set firewall bridge forward filter rule 130 action 'jump'
  set firewall bridge forward filter rule 130 inbound-interface group 'br2-ifaces'
  set firewall bridge forward filter rule 130 jump-target 'br2-fwd'

  # Forward - Default action drop:
  set firewall bridge forward filter default-action 'drop'

> And content of the custom rule-sets:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And the content of the custom rulesets:
```

  set firewall bridge name br2-fwd rule 20 source port '67'
  set firewall bridge name br2-fwd rule 20 destination port '68'
  set firewall bridge name br2-fwd rule 20 inbound-interface name 'eth6'
  set firewall bridge name br2-fwd rule 22 description 'Drop all other DHCP offers'
  set firewall bridge name br2-fwd rule 22 action 'drop'
  set firewall bridge name br2-fwd rule 22 protocol 'udp'
  set firewall bridge name br2-fwd rule 22 source port '67'
  set firewall bridge name br2-fwd rule 22 destination port '68'
  set firewall bridge name br2-fwd rule 22 log

    # Accept all ARP packets
  set firewall bridge name br2-fwd rule 30 description 'Accept ARP'
  set firewall bridge name br2-fwd rule 30 action 'accept'
  set firewall bridge name br2-fwd rule 30 ethernet-type 'arp'
    # Accept all IPv4 connections
  set firewall bridge name br2-fwd rule 40 description 'Accept ipv4'
  set firewall bridge name br2-fwd rule 40 action 'accept'
  set firewall bridge name br2-fwd rule 40 ethernet-type 'ipv4'
    # Drop everything else
  set firewall bridge name br2-fwd default-action 'drop'

IP firewall configuration
"""""""""""""""""""""""""

> Since some of the requirements listed above exceeds the capabilities of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since some of the requirements listed above exceed the capabilities of the
```

bridge firewall, we need to use the IP firewall to implement them.
For bridge br1 and br2, we need to control the traffic that is going to the

> router itself, to other local networks, and to internet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
router itself, to other local networks, and to the Internet.
```

the packet flow for traffic that comes from bridge layer and should be analized
by the IP firewall.

Access to the router itself is controlled by the base chain ``input``, and
rules to accomplish all the requirements are:

.. code-block:: none

  # First of all, if not using global state policies, we need to define them:
  set firewall ipv4 input filter rule 10 state 'established' 
  set firewall ipv4 input filter rule 10 state 'related'
  set firewall ipv4 input filter rule 10 action 'accept'
  set firewall ipv4 input filter rule 20 state 'invalid'
  set firewall ipv4 input filter rule 20 action 'drop'

  # Input - br1 - Accept access to router itself
  set firewall ipv4 input filter rule 110 description "Accept access from br1"
  set firewall ipv4 input filter rule 110 action 'accept'
  set firewall ipv4 input filter rule 110 inbound-interface group 'br1-ifaces'

  # Input - br2 - Deny access to the router
  set firewall ipv4 input filter rule 120 description "Deny access from br2"
  set firewall ipv4 input filter rule 120 action 'drop'
  set firewall ipv4 input filter rule 120 inbound-interface group 'br2-ifaces'

> And for traffic that is going to other local networks, and to internet, we need

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And for traffic that is going to other local networks, and to the Internet, we need
```

to use the base chain ``forward``. As in the bridge firewall, we are going to

> use custom rule-sets for each bridge, that would be used in ``forward`` chain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
use custom rulesets for each bridge, that would be used in the ``forward`` chain.
```

> These rule-sets are ``ip-br1-fwd`` and ``ip-br2-fwd``:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Those rulesets are ``ip-br1-fwd`` and ``ip-br2-fwd``:
```

.. code-block:: none

  # First of all, if not using global state policies, we need to define them:
  set firewall ipv4 forward filter rule 5 action 'accept'
  set firewall ipv4 forward filter rule 5 state 'established'
  set firewall ipv4 forward filter rule 5 state 'related'
  set firewall ipv4 forward filter rule 10 action 'drop'
  set firewall ipv4 forward filter rule 10 state 'invalid'

  # Forward - Catch all traffic for br1
  set firewall ipv4 forward filter rule 110 description 'br1 traffic'
  set firewall ipv4 forward filter rule 110 action 'jump'
  set firewall ipv4 forward filter rule 110 inbound-interface group 'br1-ifaces'
  set firewall ipv4 forward filter rule 110 jump-target 'ip-br1-fwd'

  # Forward - Catch all traffic for br2
  set firewall ipv4 forward filter rule 120 description 'br2 traffic'
  set firewall ipv4 forward filter rule 120 action 'jump'
  set firewall ipv4 forward filter rule 120 inbound-interface group 'br2-ifaces'
  set firewall ipv4 forward filter rule 120 jump-target 'ip-br2-fwd'

  # Forward - Default action drop:
  set firewall ipv4 forward filter default-action 'drop'

> And content of the custom rule-sets:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And the content of the custom rulesets:
```

    # Requirement: Drop all other connections
  set firewall ipv4 name ip-br2-fwd default-action 'drop'

Validation
^^^^^^^^^^

While testing the configuration, we can check logs in order to ensure that
we are accepting and/or blocking the correct traffic.

For example, while a host tries to get an IP address from a DHCP server in
br1 all DHCP discover are dropped, and in br2, we can see that DHCP offers from
untrusted servers are dropped:

.. code-block:: none

  vyos@bridge:~$ show log firewall bridge 
  Sep 17 14:22:35 kernel: [bri-NAM-br2-fwd-22-D]IN=eth7 OUT=eth5 MAC=50:00:00:09:00:00:50:00:00:04:00:00:08:00 SRC=10.2.2.199 DST=10.2.2.92 LEN=322 TOS=0x10 PREC=0x00 TTL=128 ID=0 DF PROTO=UDP SPT=67 DPT=68 LEN=302 
  Sep 17 14:28:18 kernel: [bri-NAM-br1-pre-10-D]IN=eth3 OUT= MAC=ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:00:50:79:66:68:0c:08:00 SRC=0.0.0.0 DST=255.255.255.255 LEN=392 TOS=0x10 PREC=0x00 TTL=16 ID=0 PROTO=UDP SPT=68 DPT=67 LEN=372 
  Sep 17 14:28:19 kernel: [bri-NAM-br1-pre-10-D]IN=eth3 OUT= MAC=ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:00:50:79:66:68:0c:08:00 SRC=0.0.0.0 DST=255.255.255.255 LEN=392 TOS=0x10 PREC=0x00 TTL=16 ID=0 PROTO=UDP SPT=68 DPT=67 LEN=372 

> And with op-mode commands, we can check rules matchers, actions, and counters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And with operational mode commands, we can check rules matchers, actions, and counters.
```

I suppose we should avoid jargon in the docs. We know what "op-mode" means, but beginners probably don't.
